# retrowin32 on x86-64

This collects notes on running retrowin32 "natively" on x86-64. Currently
supported:

- Mac: Rosetta
- Linux: native x86-64 (in progress)

See blog post summarizing this work:
https://neugierig.org/software/blog/2023/08/x86-x64-aarch64.html

## Build/run

### Rosetta

You need an x86 build of the SDL library:

```
$ export LIBRARY_PATH=~/sdl/x86/lib/path
```

To build and run:

```
$ ./cli/build-rosetta.sh
$ ./target/x86_64-apple-darwin/debug/retrowin32 exe/zig_hello/hello.exe
```

### Linux

```
$ ./cli/build-linux-64.sh
$ ./target/debug/retrowin32 exe/zig_hello/hello.exe
```

### Debugging

lldb eats the `*` if you attempt to pass `--win32-trace "*"` to retrowin32. The
fix is to not use `r` to start, but instead `process launch`. (The former is an
alias that attempts to do shell expansion and gets quoting wrong.)

If you step into 32-bit code, lldb doesn't realize this and still disassembles
it as 64-bit code. The best approach I've used is to

```
(lldb) dis -A i386
```

at the right place.

## Wine background

The main post to get things started was
[this big description of the hack](https://www.winehq.org/pipermail/wine-devel/2019-December/156602.html).

## Segment registers

In 64-bit x86, segment registers are always 0. fs is still used for pointing at
thread local data, but its address is set via a different mechanism than segment
registers.

To run 32-bit code, we need to switch the various segment registers:

- cs, to mark the code as 32-bit x86
- ds, required on Linux for reasons I don't quite follow
- fs, which must point at the thread local storage (Windows TIB)

(For debugging fs in particular, `exe/zig_hello/hello.exe` is useful because it
uses the TIB to find stdout, and doesn't do much more than print to it.)

### Mac

We've only tested under Rosetta, which is likely less particular about the
details than real x86-64 hardware.

[Darwin test](https://github.com/apple/darwin-xnu/blob/main/tests/ldt.c#L73) has
some notes on using LDT to transition between 32 and 64-bit.

[See a thread from the Wine author on StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/53244454/how-did-wine64-manage-to-handle-macos)
([archive link]()) about FS.

### Linux

Linux defines the GDT layout in `arch/x86/include/asm/segment.h`, but be careful
to skip over the first section that is only for 32-bit Linux. It defines some
constants like `GDT_ENTRY_DEFAULT_USER32_CS` that give constant values we use
for the cs and ds registers.

For fs:

- in 64-bit, to change where fs points to you call
  `syscall(SYS_arch_prctl, ARCH_SET_FS, addr)`
- in 32-bit, we need a GDT entry for it, which we create with
  `syscall(SYS_set_thread_area)`

Per `arch_prctl` docs, we must call the 64-bit setter to restore the old value
any time we change fs. TODO: it's unclear how multiple threads get their own
separate TEBs under this scheme, but it hasn't come up because retrowin32
doesn't support multiple threads in this mode yet.

Note: be careful when trying to look up information about this, it has changed
across Linux kernels. I confused myself a few times by reading source to old
kernels. Also, there's a `modify_ldt` API that might have been useful but it is
disabled under WSL, where I developed this.

## Calling between x86-64 and x86

To switch the processor between x86-64 and x86 ("compatibility") mode, you
switch the CS register. There are assembly primitives "far call"/"far jmp"/"far
ret" that manage these.

- A far jmp takes an address of a "m16:32" destination:
  `segment_selector << 32 | destination_ip`.
- A far call pushes the current m16:32 and jmps.
- A far ret pops a m16:32 and jmps.

Assembly handling of these particular instructions is a bit finicky. Some tools
disassemble them as plain jmp/call/ret, and expressing the instructions is
undocumented. Using AT&T assembly syntax helped.

### WOW64 and heaven's gate

WOW64, the native Windows support for x86 in an x86-64 process, must do the same
transition. It's documented in various blog posts that refer to it as "heaven's
gate".

Here snippets of the relevant assembly follow for a 32->64-bit call, with some
annotations as to which specific call/jmp form they use. It seems this varies a
lot between Windows versions etc. and it's muddled further lots of irrelevant
details, but it's

The 32-bit function starts out:

```
part1:
mov eax, ...   # possibly an id of the desired 64-bit fn to call?
mov edx, part2
call edx   # ff d2 => ff /2 edx, near call edx
```

```
part2:
jmp [part3]  # ff 25 ...  => ff /4 disp32, near jmp disp32
```

part3 is called `Wow64Transition`` in some places. It does the actual 32->64
transition, and is code shared by all 32->64 calls.

```
part3:
jmp 0033:addr   # ea ...  =>  jmpf ptr16:32, far jmp to absolute addr
...
more x86-64 code here  # <- addr points here
presumably this forwards to the actual desired call
```

Takeaways:

1. they hard-coded the segment selector, maybe? unless they're doing some
   modification when the dll loads, but all references I see have it using 0x33.
2. they use an absolute jmp to jmp forwards by just an instruction when
   transitioning 32->64

### 64 -> 32

To start the executable, or to call a 32-bit callback from a winapi definition,
we must transition from 64-bit to 32-bit.

We start in 64-bit mode in Rust code. We don't want to touch any of the
processor state here since it is fully controlled by Rust.

We need to end up in 32-bit mode in the exe with the stack laid out as follows,
as described by stdcall:

```
return address (as pushed by call)
argument 0
argument 1
...
argument N
```

and it will clear all that from the stack when it returns with an ordinary
`ret`.

The `ljmp`/`lcall` variants that take an absolute `segment selector:address` are
not available in 64-bit mode, so we must call through the `m16:32` variants that
take a memory location.

### 32 -> 64

32-bit code will call our implementations of the windows API, which are 64-bit.

At the start the stack is a stdcall frame as pictured above. We control the
address that the call maps to, and we control the logic on the other side of
that call, so we have a lot of flexibility in how it's handled.

Opposite from 64->32-bit calls, we control the callee rather than the caller.
This means we can put things on the stack that we choose because we control how
they're interpreted.

The chain of calls is:

1. [32-bit, from executable] user code has some sort of `call TheFn`
2. [32-bit asm] for each `TheFn`, impl does an `lcall trans64`
3. [64-bit asm] `trans64` switches to 64-bit stack, then calls Rust code
   `call call64`
4. [64-bit Rust] `call64` looks up the shim by index by examining the return
   address, and calls it via ordinary Rust code
5. [64-bit asm] `trans64` long returns to 32-bit asm
6. [32-bit asm] cleans up 32-bit stack

### Calling conventions

See https://www.agner.org/optimize/calling_conventions.pdf chapter 6.

The 32-bit code uses the win32 ABI: parameters are passed on the stack and the
callee saves EBX, ESI, EDI, and EBP.

The 64-bit code uses the SysV ABI: parameters go in RDI/RSI/etc. and the callee
saves RBX/RBP.

### Low addresses

Previously I was worried that our code wasn't loaded at low (32 bit) addresses,
but I changed things so that it would be.

A note from before that fix: we cannot use Rust's `asm!` related macros to
generate asm directly, as it generates code at higher addresses. I tinkered a
bit with trying to convice `global_asm!` to emit a span of labels that I could
then snip out at build time but I couldn't figure it out.

## Mac notes

### Executable layout

Print pagezero info:

```
$ otool -l the/binary
```

Dump sections in a .rlib:

```
$ size -mlx path/to/rlib
```

### x86-64 SDL

```
$ tar xf SDL-whatever.tar.gz
$ cd SDL-whatever
$ arch -x86_64 bash
$ ./configure --prefix=`pwd`/x86
$ make -j8 install
```

Then to build with it:

```
$ export LIBRARY_PATH=above/path/x86/lib
```
